fragments/one-week.md, before:

---
title: One Week of Nutritional Rigor
published_at: 2016-06-13T16:02:34Z
---

I wrote previously that as an experiment, I'm engaging in a [Calorie
counting](/fragments/calorie-counting) exercise. Here's my one week update.

I weigh 176 lbs. and was trying for an aggressive loss of 2 lbs. per week.
Based on these parameters, my fitness tracker suggested a goal of 1,200 net
Calories a day (i.e. consumed minus burnt by exercise). The results:

| Day     | Food    | Exercise | Net Relative to 1,200 Cal Goal |
| :-----: | :-----: | :------: | :----------------------------: |
| June 07 | 3,225   | 303      | +1,722                         |
| June 08 | 1,451   | 2,060    | -1,809                         |
| June 09 | 2,213   | 2,464    | -1,451                         |
| June 10 | 3,923   | 1,257    | +1,466                         |
| June 11 | 3,531   | 1,614    | +717                           |
| June 12 | 3,244   | 303      | +1,741                         |
| June 13 | 1,025   | 1,829    | -2,004                         |
| Total   |         |          | **+382**                       |

I log about a base level of about an hour of fast walking every day (my commute
and transportation around town) which is rated at ~300 Cal. Other (more
serious) exercise comes from an hour on a stationary bike (~800 Cal), runs of 6
to 13 km on varying terrain (600 to 1300 Cal), or the occasional tennis match
(~60 minutes at 400 to 650 Cal depending on doubles or singles). On any given
day I'll usually do one or two of these activities, and logged a total of nine
for the week.

Overall, I came out short of my goal, but not overwhelmingly so. This was also
reflected in my weight, which stayed roughly stable at 176 lbs. with some
fluctuations during the week. I'm going to continue the experiment for a few
more weeks to see if I can hit my target.

Some other observations:

* A 1,200 Calorie target is, shall we say, optimistic. Without offset from
  daily exercise, even a single large but not-totally-unhealthy meal can bring
  you brushing up against it. Given no exercise, it may get you three meals as
  long as they're on the _very_ lean side (i.e. garden salads with a little
  protein in them).
* Days with major overruns are perfectly correlated with days that I go out for
  brunch or to the bar. Once the drinks are flowing and given some baseline of
  peer pressure, I don't want to stop no matter how careful I'd been about diet
  earlier in the day.
* The nicest part about counting caloric intake from food is that it keeps me
  honest. An uncomfortable amount of my total consumption was coming from
  snacking and drinks which I normally justify to myself in isolation
  throughout the day in a series of [tyrannical small decisions][tyranny] that
  was having a profound impact on my diet.
* Water and coffee, at zero Calories each, are my best friends. The instinct to
  snack often has nothing to do with hunger and can be satiated with one of
  these two drinks.
* When I'm thirsty I crave for any drink under the sun that _isn't_ water
  (soda, juices, Gatorade, etc.), but given some discipline, water quenches my
  thirst _every_ time.
* Alcoholic beverages have a terribly disproportionate energy content. One
  ounce of common liquors like vodka or rum averages somewhere on the order of
  65 to 100 Calories, so even an energy economic drink like a 1.5 oz. vodka
  soda still nets you 100+. From there, things get much, much worse (say in
  your typical sugar-centric cocktail or large portion of beer for example).

[tyranny]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tyranny_of_small_decisions

Commit message:

Actually, did drop a bit of weight

fragments/one-week.md, after:

---
title: One Week of Nutritional Rigor
published_at: 2016-06-13T16:02:34Z
---

I wrote previously that as an experiment, I'm engaging in a [Calorie
counting](/fragments/calorie-counting) exercise. Here's my one week update.

I weigh 176 lbs. and was trying for an aggressive loss of 2 lbs. per week.
Based on these parameters, my fitness tracker suggested a goal of 1,200 net
Calories a day (i.e. consumed minus burnt by exercise). The results:

| Day     | Food    | Exercise | Net Relative to 1,200 Cal Goal |
| :-----: | :-----: | :------: | :----------------------------: |
| June 07 | 3,225   | 303      | +1,722                         |
| June 08 | 1,451   | 2,060    | -1,809                         |
| June 09 | 2,213   | 2,464    | -1,451                         |
| June 10 | 3,923   | 1,257    | +1,466                         |
| June 11 | 3,531   | 1,614    | +717                           |
| June 12 | 3,244   | 303      | +1,741                         |
| June 13 | 1,025   | 1,829    | -2,004                         |
| Total   |         |          | **+382**                       |

I log about a base level of about an hour of fast walking every day (my commute
and transportation around town) which is rated at ~300 Cal. Other (more
serious) exercise comes from an hour on a stationary bike (~800 Cal), runs of 6
to 13 km on varying terrain (600 to 1300 Cal), or the occasional tennis match
(~60 minutes at 400 to 650 Cal depending on doubles or singles). On any given
day I'll usually do one or two of these activities, and logged a total of nine
for the week.

Overall, I came out short of my goal, but not overwhelmingly so. My weight did
drop three pounds to 173 lbs., but given its frequent fluctuations, I'm not
convinced at the finality of the number. I'm going to continue the experiment
for a few more weeks to see if I can hit my Calorie target.

Some other observations:

* A 1,200 Calorie target is, shall we say, optimistic. Without offset from
  daily exercise, even a single large but not-totally-unhealthy meal can bring
  you brushing up against it. Given no exercise, it may get you three meals as
  long as they're on the _very_ lean side (i.e. garden salads with a little
  protein in them).
* Days with major overruns are perfectly correlated with days that I go out for
  brunch or to the bar. Once the drinks are flowing and given some baseline of
  peer pressure, I don't want to stop no matter how careful I'd been about diet
  earlier in the day.
* The nicest part about counting caloric intake from food is that it keeps me
  honest. An uncomfortable amount of my total consumption was coming from
  snacking and drinks which I normally justify to myself in isolation
  throughout the day in a series of [tyrannical small decisions][tyranny] that
  was having a profound impact on my diet.
* Water and coffee, at zero Calories each, are my best friends. The instinct to
  snack often has nothing to do with hunger and can be satiated with one of
  these two drinks.
* When I'm thirsty I crave for any drink under the sun that _isn't_ water
  (soda, juices, Gatorade, etc.), but given some discipline, water quenches my
  thirst _every_ time.
* Alcoholic beverages have a terribly disproportionate energy content. One
  ounce of common liquors like vodka or rum averages somewhere on the order of
  65 to 100 Calories, so even an energy economic drink like a 1.5 oz. vodka
  soda still nets you 100+. From there, things get much, much worse (say in
  your typical sugar-centric cocktail or large portion of beer for example).

[tyranny]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tyranny_of_small_decisions
