articles/logfmt.md, before:

If you've ever run an app on Heroku, you may have come across log messages produced by the Heroku router and wondered about their unusual formatting:

    at=info method=GET path=/ host=mutelight.org fwd="124.133.52.161"
      dyno=web.2 connect=4ms service=8ms status=200 bytes=1653

This curious format is unofficially known as "logfmt", and at Heroku we've adopted it as a standard to provide some consistency across internal components. I've never been able to find any good posts providing any context or background for logfmt, so I've put together this short write-up.

At its core, logfmt is just a basic way of displaying key/value pairs in such a way that its output is readable by a human or a computer, while at the same time not being absolutely optimal for either.

Especially with a bit of practice and colorized output, it's pretty easy for a human being to see what's going on here which is of course a core value for any good logging format. At the same time, building a machine parser for the format is trivial so any of our internal components can ingest logs produced by any other component. [Splunk also recommends the same format under their best practices](http://dev.splunk.com/view/logging-best-practices/SP-CAAADP6) so we can be sure that it can be used to search and analyze all our logs in the long term.

## Eliminate the Guesswork (#eliminate-guesswork)

A major advantage provided by logfmt is that it helps to eliminate any guesswork that a developer would have to make while deciding what to log. Take the following line in a more traditional logging format for example:

    INFO [ConsumerFetcherManager-1382721708341] Stopping all fetchers
      (kafka.consumer.ConsumerFetcherManager)

While writing this code, a developer would've had to decide how to format the log line like placing the manager's identifier in square brackets at the beginning, the module name in parenthesis at the end, with some general information in the middle. Convention can help a lot here, but it's still something that a developer has to think about it. Furthermore, what if they want to add another piece of data like number of open fetchers? Does that belong on a new line, or in another set of brackets somewhere?

An equivalent logfmt line might look this:

    level=info tag=stopping_fetchers id=ConsumerFetcherManager-1382721708341
      module=kafka.consumer.ConsumerFetcherManager

Readability isn't compromised too much, and all the developer has to do is dump any information that they think is important. Adding another piece of data is no different, just append `num_open_fetchers=3` to the end. The developer also knows that if for any reason they need to generate a statistic on-the-fly like the average number of fetchers still open, they'll easily be able to do that with a simple Splunk (or equivalent) query:

    tag=stopping_fetchers | stats p50(num_open_fetchers) p95(num_open_fetchers)
      p99(num_open_fetchers)

## Human logfmt (#human)

**Note &mdash;** Added after original publication (on March 30, 2016) to
reflect changes to the recommended best practices.

logfmt may be more readable than something like JSON, but it's still difficult
to scan quickly for humans. To improve that, I'd recommend using the approach
seen in [logrus][logrus] and including a human readable message with every log
line:

    level=info msg="Stopping all fetchers"
      tag=stopping_fetchers id=ConsumerFetcherManager-1382721708341
      module=kafka.consumer.ConsumerFetcherManager

In development, a log output formatter can then give the `msg` field special
treatment by displaying it in way that a human can easily read (along with
other special fields like `level`):

    info | Stopping all fetchers          module=kafka.consumer.ConsumerFetcherManager
    info | Performing log compaction      module=kafka.compacter.LogCompactionManager
    info | Performing garbage collection  module=kafka.cleaner.GarbageCollectionManager
    info | Starting all fetchers          module=kafka.consumer.ConsumerFetcherManager

I'd also recommend introducing a convention to assign a machine-friendly "tag"
field so that any of these lines can still easily be found with a Splunk
search:

    info | Stopping all fetchers          tag=stopping_fetchers module=kafka.consumer.ConsumerFetcherManager
    info | Performing log compaction      tag=log_compaction module=kafka.compacter.LogCompactionManager
    info | Performing garbage collection  tag=garbage_collection module=kafka.cleaner.GarbageCollectionManager
    info | Starting all fetchers          tag=starting_fetchers module=kafka.consumer.ConsumerFetcherManager

## Building Context (#building-context)

logfmt also lends itself well to building context around operations. Inside a request for example, as important information becomes available, it can be added to a request-specific context and included with every log line published by the app. This may not seem immediately useful, but it can be very helpful while debugging in production later, as only a single log line need be found to get a good idea of what's going on.

For instance, consider this simple Sinatra app:

``` ruby
def authenticate!
  @user = User.authenticate!(env["HTTP_AUTHORIZATION"]) || throw(401)
  log_context.merge! user: @user.email, user_id: @user.id
end

def find_app
  @app = App.find!(params[:id])
  log_context.merge! app: @app.name, app_id: @app.id
end

before do
  log "Starting request", tag: "request_start"
end

get "/:id" do
  authenticate!
  find_app!
end

after do
  log "Finished request", tag: "request_finish", status: response.status
end

error do
  e = env["sinatra.error"]
  log "Request errored", tag: "request_error",
    error_class: e.class.name, error_message: e.message
end
```

Typical logging produced as part of a request might look like this:

    msg="Request finished" tag=request_finish status=200 
      user=brandur@mutelight.org user_id=1234 app=mutelight app_id=1234

The value becomes even more apparent when we consider what would be logged on an error, which automatically contains some key information to help with debugging (note that in real life, we'd include a stack trace as well):

    msg="Request errored" tag=request_error error_class=NoMethodError
      error_message="undefined method `serialize' for nil:NilClass"
      user=brandur@mutelight.org user_id=1234 app=mutelight app_id=1234

## Implementations

A few projects from already exist to help parse logfmt in various languages:

* [logfmt for Clojure](https://github.com/tcrayford/logfmt)
* [logfmt for Go](http://godoc.org/github.com/kr/logfmt)
* [logfmt for Node.JS](https://github.com/csquared/node-logfmt)
* [logfmt for Python](https://pypi.python.org/pypi/logfmt/0.1)
* [logfmt for Ruby](https://github.com/cyberdelia/logfmt-ruby)

[logrus]: https://github.com/Sirupsen/logrus

Commit message:

Move to YAML frontmatter format for articles

articles/logfmt.md, after:

---
hook: A logging format used inside companies such as Heroku and Stripe which is optimal
  for easy development, consistency, and good legibility for humans and computers.
location: San Francisco
published_at: 2013-10-28 16:28:04.000000000 Z
title: logfmt
---

If you've ever run an app on Heroku, you may have come across log messages produced by the Heroku router and wondered about their unusual formatting:

    at=info method=GET path=/ host=mutelight.org fwd="124.133.52.161"
      dyno=web.2 connect=4ms service=8ms status=200 bytes=1653

This curious format is unofficially known as "logfmt", and at Heroku we've adopted it as a standard to provide some consistency across internal components. I've never been able to find any good posts providing any context or background for logfmt, so I've put together this short write-up.

At its core, logfmt is just a basic way of displaying key/value pairs in such a way that its output is readable by a human or a computer, while at the same time not being absolutely optimal for either.

Especially with a bit of practice and colorized output, it's pretty easy for a human being to see what's going on here which is of course a core value for any good logging format. At the same time, building a machine parser for the format is trivial so any of our internal components can ingest logs produced by any other component. [Splunk also recommends the same format under their best practices](http://dev.splunk.com/view/logging-best-practices/SP-CAAADP6) so we can be sure that it can be used to search and analyze all our logs in the long term.

## Eliminate the Guesswork (#eliminate-guesswork)

A major advantage provided by logfmt is that it helps to eliminate any guesswork that a developer would have to make while deciding what to log. Take the following line in a more traditional logging format for example:

    INFO [ConsumerFetcherManager-1382721708341] Stopping all fetchers
      (kafka.consumer.ConsumerFetcherManager)

While writing this code, a developer would've had to decide how to format the log line like placing the manager's identifier in square brackets at the beginning, the module name in parenthesis at the end, with some general information in the middle. Convention can help a lot here, but it's still something that a developer has to think about it. Furthermore, what if they want to add another piece of data like number of open fetchers? Does that belong on a new line, or in another set of brackets somewhere?

An equivalent logfmt line might look this:

    level=info tag=stopping_fetchers id=ConsumerFetcherManager-1382721708341
      module=kafka.consumer.ConsumerFetcherManager

Readability isn't compromised too much, and all the developer has to do is dump any information that they think is important. Adding another piece of data is no different, just append `num_open_fetchers=3` to the end. The developer also knows that if for any reason they need to generate a statistic on-the-fly like the average number of fetchers still open, they'll easily be able to do that with a simple Splunk (or equivalent) query:

    tag=stopping_fetchers | stats p50(num_open_fetchers) p95(num_open_fetchers)
      p99(num_open_fetchers)

## Human logfmt (#human)

**Note &mdash;** Added after original publication (on March 30, 2016) to
reflect changes to the recommended best practices.

logfmt may be more readable than something like JSON, but it's still difficult
to scan quickly for humans. To improve that, I'd recommend using the approach
seen in [logrus][logrus] and including a human readable message with every log
line:

    level=info msg="Stopping all fetchers"
      tag=stopping_fetchers id=ConsumerFetcherManager-1382721708341
      module=kafka.consumer.ConsumerFetcherManager

In development, a log output formatter can then give the `msg` field special
treatment by displaying it in way that a human can easily read (along with
other special fields like `level`):

    info | Stopping all fetchers          module=kafka.consumer.ConsumerFetcherManager
    info | Performing log compaction      module=kafka.compacter.LogCompactionManager
    info | Performing garbage collection  module=kafka.cleaner.GarbageCollectionManager
    info | Starting all fetchers          module=kafka.consumer.ConsumerFetcherManager

I'd also recommend introducing a convention to assign a machine-friendly "tag"
field so that any of these lines can still easily be found with a Splunk
search:

    info | Stopping all fetchers          tag=stopping_fetchers module=kafka.consumer.ConsumerFetcherManager
    info | Performing log compaction      tag=log_compaction module=kafka.compacter.LogCompactionManager
    info | Performing garbage collection  tag=garbage_collection module=kafka.cleaner.GarbageCollectionManager
    info | Starting all fetchers          tag=starting_fetchers module=kafka.consumer.ConsumerFetcherManager

## Building Context (#building-context)

logfmt also lends itself well to building context around operations. Inside a request for example, as important information becomes available, it can be added to a request-specific context and included with every log line published by the app. This may not seem immediately useful, but it can be very helpful while debugging in production later, as only a single log line need be found to get a good idea of what's going on.

For instance, consider this simple Sinatra app:

``` ruby
def authenticate!
  @user = User.authenticate!(env["HTTP_AUTHORIZATION"]) || throw(401)
  log_context.merge! user: @user.email, user_id: @user.id
end

def find_app
  @app = App.find!(params[:id])
  log_context.merge! app: @app.name, app_id: @app.id
end

before do
  log "Starting request", tag: "request_start"
end

get "/:id" do
  authenticate!
  find_app!
end

after do
  log "Finished request", tag: "request_finish", status: response.status
end

error do
  e = env["sinatra.error"]
  log "Request errored", tag: "request_error",
    error_class: e.class.name, error_message: e.message
end
```

Typical logging produced as part of a request might look like this:

    msg="Request finished" tag=request_finish status=200 
      user=brandur@mutelight.org user_id=1234 app=mutelight app_id=1234

The value becomes even more apparent when we consider what would be logged on an error, which automatically contains some key information to help with debugging (note that in real life, we'd include a stack trace as well):

    msg="Request errored" tag=request_error error_class=NoMethodError
      error_message="undefined method `serialize' for nil:NilClass"
      user=brandur@mutelight.org user_id=1234 app=mutelight app_id=1234

## Implementations

A few projects from already exist to help parse logfmt in various languages:

* [logfmt for Clojure](https://github.com/tcrayford/logfmt)
* [logfmt for Go](http://godoc.org/github.com/kr/logfmt)
* [logfmt for Node.JS](https://github.com/csquared/node-logfmt)
* [logfmt for Python](https://pypi.python.org/pypi/logfmt/0.1)
* [logfmt for Ruby](https://github.com/cyberdelia/logfmt-ruby)

[logrus]: https://github.com/Sirupsen/logrus
